Node.js is a runtime environment that allows you to run JavaScript outside the browser. It is built on Chrome's V8 JavaScript engine and enables developers to create server-side applications using JavaScript.

Runtime: The environment where JS code is executed. server, browser, pn a small watch,...

V8 engine: An open source JS engine developed by google. It is used to execute JS code in various environments, most notably in the Google Chrome browser.
Mozilla has their own JS engine- SpiderMonkey. Microsoft has theirs- Chakra. And so on.

Bun: Like Node.js, Bun is a runtime environment that allows you to execute JavaScript code on the server side.
Bun is a modern JavaScript runtime designed to be a faster and more efficient alternative to Node.js. It is built on the JavaScriptCore engine (used by Safari) instead of V8 (used by Node.js and Deno).


npm init -y
This command is used in Node.js to quickly generate a package.json file with default values.


Can run js file by using 
node filename.js
changing script in paackage.json(write start: node index.js) to run the file on start. And then npm start or npm run start


npm Node Package Manager
default package manager for Node.js
It's a package manager for JS, primarily used for managing libraries and dependencies in Node.js projects. NPM allows developers to easily install, update, and manage packages of reusable code.
package managers are an important concept in programming languages/runtimes. eg.: package manager of rust is cargo

Uses of npm
initializing a project: npm init
running scripts: npm run test
installing external dependencies: npm install chalk

Common npm Commands
Command	                        Description
npm init -y         	        Quickly create package.json with default values
npm install <package>	        Install a package locally
npm install -g <package>	    Install a package globally
npm uninstall <package>	        Remove a package
npm update	                    Update all dependencies
npm start	                    Run the start script from package.json



node -h
node index.js -h




Internal packages
fs, path, http,...

External packages
express, chalk


npm install      Install All Dependencies from package.json
npm install package-name      Install a Specific Package


Every external package is updated incrementally. A specific version looks like eg.: "chalk": "^5.3.0"
The format is as MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH
MAJOR: Incompatible changes that may break existing code.
MINOR: New features added without breaking backward compatibility.
PATCH: Bug fixes and small improvements without adding new features.



Popular Node.js Frameworks
Express.js – Lightweight and fast backend framework
Nest.js – Scalable and enterprise-ready framework
Socket.io – Real-time WebSockets for chat apps
Next.js – React-based full-stack framework

🔥 Why Use Node.js?
✅ Fast & Lightweight
✅ Great for API Development
✅ Large Community Support
✅ Used by Companies like Netflix, PayPal, LinkedIn

 What Can You Build with Node.js?
✅ Web Applications (Backend) – REST APIs, GraphQL APIs
✅ Real-time Apps – Chat applications, Gaming apps
✅ Streaming Services – Netflix, YouTube-like platforms
✅ Command-line Tools – Custom CLI tools
✅ IoT Applications – Control smart devices